Hypothalamic orexin prevents hepatic insulin resistance induced by social defeat stress in mice.
Depression is associated with insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes, although the molecular mechanism behind the pathological link remains unclear. Orexin, a hypothalamic neuropeptide regulating energy and glucose homeostasis, has been implicated in the endogenous antidepressant mechanism. To clarify whether orexin is involved in the coordination between mental and metabolic functions, we investigated the influence of orexin deficiency on social interaction behavior and glucose metabolism in mice subjected to chronic social defeat stress. Chronic stress-induced glucose intolerance and systemic insulin resistance as well as social avoidance were ameliorated by calorie restriction in an orexin-dependent manner. Moreover, orexin-deficient mice maintained under ad libitum-fed conditions after defeat stress exhibited hyperinsulinemia and elevated HOMA-IR (homeostasis model assessment for insulin resistance), despite normal fasting blood glucose levels. In a pyruvate tolerance test to evaluate hepatic insulin sensitivity, chronic stress-induced abnormal glucose elevation was observed in orexin-deficient but not wild-type mice, although both types of mice were susceptible to chronic stress. In addition, insulin-induced phosphorylation of Akt in the liver was impaired in orexin-deficient but not wild-type mice after chronic stress. These results demonstrate that the central physiological actions of orexin under ad libitum-fed conditions are required for the adaptive response to chronic defeat stress, which can prevent the development of hepatic insulin resistance but not social avoidance behavior. Moreover, calorie restriction, a paradigm to strongly activate orexin neurons, appears to prevent the persistence of depression-like behavior per se, leading to the amelioration of impaired glucose metabolism after chronic stress; therefore, we suggest that hypothalamic orexin system is the key for inhibiting the exacerbating link between depression and type 2 diabetes.
