Therapeutic effect of resveratrol on mice with depression.
The effect and mechanism of resveratrol on depression-like behavior in mice with depression were investigated. A mouse model of depression was established by social isolation combined with chronic unpredictable stress. The mice were randomly divided into the control group, the model group, the low dose group, the medium dose group and the high dose group. The rats in the low, medium and high dose groups were intraperitoneally injected with resveratrol 10, 20 and 30 mg/kg, respectively. The control and model groups were intraperitoneally injected with an equal volume of normal saline. After 21 days of continuous treatment, the neurobehavioral changes of each group were analyzed by forced swimming test, tail suspension experiment and sucrose consumption experiment. Dopamine (DA) and serotoni (5-HT) and the level of brain-derived nerve growth factor (BDNF) in the prefrontal cortex of each group were analyzed by ELISA. The level of neuropeptide (NPY) expression was analyzed by western blot analysis. Compared with the model group, the immobility time of the tail suspension experiment and forced swimming experiment in the low, medium and high dose groups was significantly prolonged (P<0.05), while the 24 h sucrose consumption was significantly increased (P<0.05), showing a dose-dependent manner. Compared with the model group, the levels of DA and 5-HT in the prefrontal cortex of the low, medium and high dose groups were significantly increased, and showed a dose-dependent effect (P<0.05). Compared with the model group, the expression levels of NPY protein in the low, medium and high dose groups were significantly increased, and gradually increased with the increase of the dose, the difference was statistically significant (P<0.05). Resveratrol can significantly increase the levels of neurotransmitters DA and 5-HT in the prefrontal cortex and increase the expression of NPY in the brain, which can play an antagonistic role in depression.
