Attenuation of oxidative stress and neurotoxicity involved in the antidepressant-like effect of the MK-801(dizocilpine) in Bacillus Calmette-Guerin-induced depression in mice.
Background The emerging line of research suggests that neuro-inflammation and oxidative stress are linked to the development of depression-like behavior. The tryptophan metabolizing enzyme, indolamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), serves as an important interface between chronic inflammation and depression. IDO is induced by pro-inflammatory cytokines and diverts tryptophan towards the kynurenine pathway, decreasing serotonin synthesis. Further, the metabolites of kynurenine pathway increase brain oxidative stress and also cause N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor-mediated exitotoxicity. The resulting oxidative damage and dysfunction in glutamatergic neurotransmission alters the network connectivity of the brain, which may be the further mechanism for emergence of depression-like symptoms. Methods A depression-like illness was induced in mice by injecting Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) suspended in isotonic saline at a dose of 107 CFU I.P. The mice were then divided into different groups and were administered MK-801 or normal saline for the next 21 days, after which a battery of behavior and biochemical tests were conducted to assess them. Results The BCG group had significantly reduced sucrose preference index and an increase in immobility time in forced swim test (FST) and Tail Suspension Test (TST) as compared to the saline group. There was also a significant increase in the brain MDA levels and a decline in the brain GSH levels. The hippocampal tissue from the BCG group had significantly more comet cells than the saline group. The NMDA receptor antagonist, MK-801, was able to reverse the BCG-induced depression-like behaviour. MK-801 also showed significant decrease in brain oxidative stress but failed to show significant protection against BCG-induced neurotoxicity observed in comet assay. Conclusions The NMDA receptor antagonist, MK-801, mitigated BCG-induced, depressive-like behavior in mice by improving the sucrose preference and decreasing the duration of immobility time in TST and FST. The overall improvement in depression-like behavior was accompanied by a reduction in brain oxidative stress and comet cells, thus suggesting the antioxidant and neuroprotective action of MK-801.
