Cholecalciferol abolishes depressive-like behavior and hippocampal glucocorticoid receptor impairment induced by chronic corticosterone administration in mice.
Several attempts have been made to understand the role of cholecalciferol (vitamin D3) in the modulation of neuropsychiatric disorders. Notably, the deficiency of vitamin D3 is considered a pandemic and has been postulated to enhance the risk of major depressive disorder (MDD). Therefore, this study aims to investigate the antidepressant-like effect of cholecalciferol in a mouse model of depression induced by corticosterone, and the possible role of glucocorticoid receptors (GR), NLRP3 and autophagic pathways in this effect. Corticosterone administration (20 mg/kg, p.o., for 21 days) significantly increased the immobility time and grooming latency, as well as reduced the total time spent grooming in mice subjected to the tail suspension test (TST) and splash test (ST), respectively. Importantly, these behavioral alterations were associated with reduced GR immunocontent in the hippocampus of mice. Conversely, the repeated administration of cholecalciferol (2.5 μg/kg, p.o.) in the last 7 days of corticosterone administration was effective to prevent the increased immobility time in the TST and the reduced time spent grooming in the ST, and partially abolished the increase in the grooming latency induced by corticosterone, suggesting its antidepressant-like effect. These behavioral effects were similar to those exerted by fluoxetine (10 mg/kg, p.o.). Moreover, the corticosterone-induced reduction on hippocampal GR immunocontent was not observed in mice treated with cholecalciferol. Additionally, cholecalciferol treatment per se reduced the immunocontent of NLRP3 inflammasome-related proteins ASC, caspase-1, and TXNIP in the hippocampus of mice. No alterations on hippocampal immunocontent of the autophagic-related proteins phospho-mTORC1, beclin-1, and LC3A/B were observed following cholecalciferol treatment and/or corticosterone administration. Collectively, our results provide insights into the effects of cholecalciferol in depression-related behaviors that seem to be related, at least in part, to GR modulation.
