Dopaminergic Signaling in the Nucleus Accumbens Modulates Stress-Coping Strategies during Inescapable Stress.
Maladaptation to stress is a critical risk factor in stress-related disorders, such as major depression and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Dopamine signaling in the nucleus accumbens (NAc) has been shown to modulate behavior by reinforcing learning and evading aversive stimuli, which are important for the survival of animals under environmental challenges such as stress. However, the mechanisms through which dopaminergic transmission responds to stressful events and subsequently regulates its downstream neuronal activity during stress remain unknown. To investigate how dopamine signaling modulates stress-coping behavior, we measured the subsecond fluctuation of extracellular dopamine concentration and pH using fast scanning cyclic voltammetry (FSCV) in the NAc, a postsynaptic target of midbrain dopaminergic neurons, in male mice engaged in a tail suspension test (TST). The results revealed a transient decrease in dopamine concentration and an increase in pH levels when the animals changed behaviors, from being immobile to struggling. Interestingly, optogenetic inhibition of dopamine release in NAc, potentiated the struggling behavior in animals under the TST. We then addressed the causal relationship of such a dopaminergic transmission with behavioral alterations by knocking out both the dopamine receptors, i.e., D1 and D2, in the NAc using viral vector-mediated genome editing. Behavioral analyses revealed that male D1 knock-out mice showed significantly more struggling bouts and longer struggling durations during the TST, while male D2 knock-out mice did not. Our results therefore indicate that D1 dopaminergic signaling in the NAc plays a pivotal role in the modulation of stress-coping behaviors in animals under tail suspension stress.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT The tail suspension test (TST) has been widely used as a despair-based behavioral assessment to screen the antidepressant so long. Despite its prevalence in the animal studies, the neural substrate underlying the changes of behavior during the test remains unclear. This study provides an evidence for a role of dopaminergic transmission in the modulation of stress-coping behavior during the TST, a despair test widely used to screen the antidepressants in rodents. Taking into consideration the fact that the dopamine metabolism is upregulated by almost all antidepressants, a part of which acts directly on the dopaminergic transmission, current results would uncover the molecular mechanism through which the dopaminergic signaling mediates antidepressant effect with facilitation of the recovery from the despair-like behavior in the TST.
