Stress-induced alterations of social behavior are reversible by antagonism of steroid hormones in C57/BL6 mice.
Various disturbances of social behavior, such as autism, depression, or posttraumatic stress disorder, have been associated with an altered steroid hormone homeostasis and a dysregulation of the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis. A link between steroid hormone antagonists and the treatment of stress-related conditions has been suggested. We evaluated the effects of stress induction on social behavior in the three chambers and its potential reversibility upon specific steroid hormone antagonism in mice. C57BL/6 mice were stressed twice daily for 8 days by chronic swim testing. Social behavior was evaluated by measuring, first, the preference for sociability and, second, the preference for social novelty in the three-chamber approach before and after the chronic swim test. The reversibility of behavior upon stress induction was analyzed after applying steroid hormone antagonists targeting glucocorticoids with etomidate, mineralocorticoids with potassium canrenoate, and androgens with cyproterone acetate and metformin. In the chronic swim test, increased floating time from 0.8 ± 0.2 min up to 4.8 ± 0.25 min was detected (p < 0.01). In the three-chamber approach, increased preference for sociability and decreased preference for social novelty was detected pre- versus post-stress induction. These alterations of social behavior were barely affected by etomidate and potassium canrenoate, whereas the two androgen antagonists metformin and cyproterone acetate restored social behavior even beyond baseline conditions. The alteration of social behavior was better reversed by the androgen as compared with the glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid antagonists. This suggests that social behavior is primarily controlled by androgen rather than by glucocorticoid or mineralocorticoid action. The stress-induced changes in preference for sociability are incompletely explained by steroid hormone action alone. As the best response was related to metformin, an effect via glucose levels might confound the results and should be subject to future research.
