Chronic sleep disruption induces depression-like behavior in adolescent male and female mice and sensitization of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis in adolescent female mice.
Depression is a prevalent mood disorder responsible for reduced quality of life for over 264 million people. Depression commonly develops during adolescence and becomes twice as prevalent in females than in males. However, the mechanisms underlying adolescent depression onset and sex differences in the prevalence rate remain unclear. Adolescent exposure to stress and subsequent sensitization of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis contributes to mood disorder development, and females are particularly vulnerable to HPA sensitization. Repeated exposure to stressors common to adolescent development, like sleep disruption, could partially be responsible for adolescent female susceptibility to depression. To address this possibility, 80 adolescent and adult CD-1 mice (Male, n = 40; Female, n = 40) were manually sleep disrupted for the first four hours of each rest cycle or allowed normal rest for eight consecutive days. Depression-like behavior was assessed with the forced swim test. 5-HT1A and glucocorticoid receptor expression and concurrent cellular activation via glucocorticoid receptor/c-Fos colocalization were examined in various brain regions to assess cellular correlates of depression and HPA-axis activation. Both adolescent male and female mice displayed significantly greater depression-like behavior and prelimbic c-Fos expression after chronic sleep disruption than non-sleep disrupted adolescent and sleep disrupted adult counterparts. However, sleep disrupted adolescent females demonstrated greater dorsal raphe 5-HT1A expression than sleep disrupted adolescent males. Adolescent females and males had decreased medial prefrontal 5-HT1A expression after chronic sleep disruption, but only adolescent females expressed decreased hippocampal 5-HT1A expression compared to controls. Chronic sleep disruption significantly increased corticosterone release, glucocorticoid expression in the CA1, and activation of glucocorticoid immunoreactive cells in the prelimbic cortex of adolescent females but not in adolescent males. These findings suggest that chronic sleep disruption during adolescence could give rise to depressive symptoms in male and female adolescents through differing signaling mechanisms.
