Sex- and stress-dependent effects of a single injection of ketamine on open field and forced swim behavior.
Ketamine has emerged as a novel treatment for common psychiatric conditions such as Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) and anxiety disorders, many of which can be initiated and exacerbated by psychological stress. Sex differences in the frequency of both anxiety and depressive disorders are well known and could be due to sex differences in neuroendocrine responses to stress. Ketamine is known to modulate the hormonal response to stress, specifically corticosterone. It is not clear if the acute effect of ketamine on corticosterone differs by sex, or what role this could play in subsequent behavior. Here we test whether a single injection of (R,S)-ketamine (30 mg/kg, i.p.), administered either with or without unpredictable chronic stress (UCS), has different sustained effects on open field test (OFT), elevated zero maze (EZM) or forced swim test (FST) behavior in female versus male C57BL/6J mice. In the OFT (24 h post-injection), ketamine increased center square exploration in males but not females. In contrast, in the FST (72 h post-injection), females showed a trend toward a decrease in immobility after ketamine whereas males were not strongly modulated. These behavioral effects of ketamine were stronger in the presence of UCS than in unstressed animals. UCS animals also showed lower corticosterone after injection than unstressed animals, and in the presence of UCS ketamine increased corticosterone; these effects were similar in both sexes. Corticosterone post-injection did not predict subsequent behavior. These findings complement a growing preclinical literature suggesting both stress-dependency and sex differences in OFT and FST behavioral responses to ketamine.LAY SUMMARYIn humans, it is known that major depression and anxiety disorders, which can be caused or made worse by exposure to psychological stress, occur roughly twice as frequently in women than in men, but the underpinnings of these effects are not well characterized. In the current study, we explored how sex interacts with stress and ketamine (a rapidly acting antidepressant) by assessing both open field and forced swim behavior in mice after chronic mild stress. We report the novel finding that male mice exhibit greater exploration of the aversive center square in the open field after ketamine, whereas females trended toward lower immobility (often interpreted as an antidepressant-like effect) in the forced swim test after this drug, and these effects were amplified by prior stress exposure.
