Lipidomics reveals that acupuncture modulates the lipid metabolism and inflammatory interaction in a mouse model of depression.
Depression is a serious disease that has considerable impact on lipid metabolism and inflammatory responses. Recent studies have shown that leptin, which is well known as a mediator of energy homeostasis and is a cytokine in inflammatory response, plays an important role in depression. Acupuncture is widely used to treat depression; however, the underlying mechanisms and the effect of acupuncture on depression remain poorly understood. In this study, we utilized the chronic restraint stress (CRS) induced depression model and acupuncture treatment was performed at KI10, LR8, LU8, LR4 (AP) or non-acupoint (NP). Then, lipidomics was applied to investigate the effects of acupuncture on lipid metabolism and analyze leptin signals in the brain and changes of immune markers. Acupuncture treatment at AP improved depression-like behavior in an open-field test, forced swimming test, and marble burying test. Concurrently, CRS mice treated with AP acupuncture (CRS + AP) had significantly lower levels of aspartate aminotransaminase (AST, liver injury markers) and exhibited different lipid patterns in liver lipidomic profiles. In particular, triglycerides (TGs) contributed the change of lipid patterns. Compared to the CRS mice, TGs with relatively high degrees of unsaturated fatty acids increased in the CRS + AP mice, but did not change in CRS mice treated with NP acupuncture (CRS + NP). The levels of leptin in plasma and leptin receptor positive cells in the brain (hypothalamus and hippocampus) decreased and increased, respectively, in the CRS + AP mice, while opposite patterns were exhibited in the CRS and CRS + NP mice. These results indicated that acupuncture treatment at AP attenuated leptin insensitivity in CRS mice. Additionally, expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1 beta and tumor necrosis factor-alpha were decreased in the spleen, plasma, and liver of CRS + AP mice, which was one of results of alleviation of leptin resistance. In conclusion, these results show that AP acupuncture treatment effectively alleviated the depression-like behavior, affected immune responses, and altered hepatic lipid metabolism through the attenuation of leptin insensitivity.
