Effect of m-Trifluoromethyl-diphenyl diselenide on the Pain-Depression Dyad Induced by Reserpine: Insights on Oxidative Stress, Apoptotic, and Glucocorticoid Receptor Modulation.
Chronic pain and depression often coexist sharing common pathological mechanisms, and available analgesics and antidepressants have demonstrated limited clinical efficacy. Evidence has demonstrated that neuronal oxidative stress, apoptosis, and also glucocorticoid receptor dysregulation facilitate the occurrence and development of both chronic pain and depression. This study evaluated the effect of the organoselenium compound m-trifluoromethyl-diphenyl diselenide [(m-CF3-PhSe)2] in the pain-depression comorbidity induced by reserpine. Mice were treated with reserpine 0.5 mg/kg for 3 days (intraperitoneal, once a day), and in the next 2 days, they were treated with (m-CF3-PhSe)2 10 mg/kg (intragastric, once a day). Thirty minutes after the last administration of (m-CF3-PhSe)2, mice were subjected to the behavioral testing. (m-CF3-PhSe)2 treatment reverted the reserpine-increased thermal hyperalgesia and depressive-like behavior observed in the hot-plate test and forced swimming test, respectively. Reserpine provoked a decrease of crossings and rearings in the open-field test, while (m-CF3-PhSe)2 presented a tendency to normalize these parameters. Reserpine and/or (m-CF3-PhSe)2 treatments did not alter the locomotor activity of mice observed in the rota-rod test. These effects could be related to modulation of oxidative stress, apoptotic pathway, and glucocorticoid receptors, once (m-CF3-PhSe)2 normalized thiobarbituric acid reactive substances and 4-hydroxynonenal modified protein levels, markers of lipoperoxidation, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase cleaved/total ratio, and glucocorticoid receptor levels increased by reserpine in the hippocampus. Considering that pain-depression dyad is a complex state of difficult treatment, this organoselenium compound could raise as an interesting alternative to treat pain-depression condition.
