Antidepressant-like effect of sodium orthovanadate in a mouse model of chronic unpredictable mild stress.
Depression is a psychiatric disorder characterized by low-esteem, anhedonia, social deficit, and lack of interest. Decreased brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and impaired tropomyosin kinase B receptor (TrkB receptor) signaling are associated with depression. In our study, depressive-like behavior was induced in mice by chronic unpredictable mild stress (CUMS) model. Various behavioral tests like tail suspension test (TST), open field test (OFT), sucrose preference test (SPT); biochemical analyses for corticosterone, reduced glutathione (GSH), lipid peroxidation (LPO), superoxide dismutase (SOD), nitric oxide (NO) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for BDNF were performed. Body weight was measured every week. CUMS induced depressive-like behavior was found to be associated with increased oxidative stress in the brain and serum corticisterone with subsequent reduction of BDNF. Sodium orthovanadate (SOV), a protein tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor already reported to elevate BDNF levels, was used as the test drug. Sodium orthovanadate (5 mg/kg, 10 mg/kg) and fluoxetine (FLX-10 mg/kg) was given to mice orally for 21days before 30 min of stress induction. The behavioral tests reflected depressive-like behavior in CUMS, which was attenuated by both SOV and fluoxetine. SOV at 10 mg/kg demonstrated significant results in the present study characterized by decreased malondialdehyde levels (MDA/LPO), NO levels, and increased GSH level and SOD activity in both the cortex and hippocampus. Besides, ELISA has revealed the significant elevation of BDNF levels in the treatment groups (SOV-5 mg/kg, 10 mg/kg and FLX-10 mg/kg) as compared to the disease group (CUMS). Therefore, the treatment with SOV appeared to reverse both oxidative and nitrosative stress. Decreased serum corticosterone levels observed with SOV (5 & 10 mg/kg), FLX-10 mg/kg, FLX (10 mg/kg) + SOV (5 mg/kg); and SOV-10 mg/kg per-se treatment and elevated BDNF level with SOV (5 & 10 mg/kg), FLX-10 mg/kg were associated with attenuation of depressive-like behavior. The findings of this preliminary study indicate that SOV has the potential to restore antidepressant-like effects or prevent stress-induced anhedonia and so further molecular mechanisms are warranted for clinical translation.
