Involvement of serotonergic neurotransmission in the antidepressant-like effect elicited by cholecalciferol in the chronic unpredictable stress model in mice.
Cholecalciferol deficiency has been associated with stress-related psychiatric disorders, particularly depression. Therefore, the present study investigated the antidepressant-like effect of cholecalciferol in female mice and the possible role of the serotonergic system in this response. The ability of cholecalciferol to elicit an antidepressant-like effect and to modulate serotonin levels in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex of mice subjected to chronic unpredictable stress (CUS) was also investigated. The administration of cholecalciferol (2.5, 7.5, and 25 µg/kg, p.o.) for 7 days, similar to fluoxetine (10 mg/kg, p.o., serotonin reuptake inhibitor), reduced the immobility time in the tail suspension test, without altering the locomotor performance in the open-field test. Moreover, the administration of p-chlorophenylalanine methyl ester (PCPA - 100 mg/kg, i.p., for 4 days, a selective inhibitor of tryptophan hydroxylase, involved in the serotonin synthesis) abolished the antidepressant-like effect of cholecalciferol and fluoxetine in the tail suspension test, demonstrating the involvement of serotonergic system. Additionally, CUS protocol (21 days) induced depressive-like behavior in the tail suspension test and decreased serotonin levels in the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus of mice. Conversely, the administration of cholecalciferol and fluoxetine in the last 7 days of CUS protocol completely abolished the stress-induced depressive-like phenotype. Cholecalciferol was also effective to abrogate CUS-induced reduction on serotonin levels in the prefrontal cortex, but not in the hippocampus. Our results indicate that cholecalciferol has an antidepressant-like effect in mice by modulating the serotonergic system and support the assumption that cholecalciferol may have beneficial effects for the management of depression.
