Muscone with Attenuation of Neuroinflammation and Oxidative Stress Exerts Antidepressant-Like Effect in Mouse Model of Chronic Restraint Stress.
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a common mental disorder with high morbidity. Stress negatively affects for MDD development, whereby transport of stress-induced inflammatory mediators to the central nervous system (CNS) is associated with the etiology of mood disorders. Muscone is a pharmacologically active ingredient isolated from musk, with anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects. We hypothesized that muscone may ameliorate depression-like behavior by regulating inflammatory responses. To test this hypothesis, we used the chronic restraint stress (CRS) depression model, and CRS mice were treated with muscone (10 mg/kg, i.g., respectively) for 14 days. The effects of the drug on depressive-like behaviors were evaluated via the open field test (OFT), novelty-suppressed feeding test (NSFT), tail suspension test (TST), and forced swimming test (FST). Quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR) was utilized to assess levels of proinflammatory cytokines (IL-6, TNF-α, COX2, and IL-1) and the anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-4 and IL-10). We also determined levels of oxidative stress factors (malondialdehyde, superoxide dismutase, and glutathione peroxidase), as well as doublecortin (DCX) expression by immunofluorescence. The results showed that depression-like behavior and inflammatory levels were improved after muscone treatment. Muscone also significantly improved neurogenesis in the CRS mouse hippocampus and decreased oxidative stress in both the central and peripheral nervous systems. In conclusion, this work is the first to demonstrate that muscone has an antidepressant effect using a CRS model. Oxidative stress, neurogenesis, and inflammatory pathways are key factors affected by the drug and may represent new therapeutic targets to treat MDD, in this impact. These results may represent a new therapeutic target for MDD.
