Growth Hormone Action in Somatostatin Neurons Regulates Anxiety and Fear Memory.
Dysfunctions in growth hormone (GH) secretion increase the prevalence of anxiety and other neuropsychiatric diseases. GH receptor (GHR) signaling in the amygdala has been associated with fear memory, a key feature of posttraumatic stress disorder. However, it is currently unknown which neuronal population is targeted by GH action to influence the development of neuropsychiatric diseases. Here, we showed that approximately 60% of somatostatin (SST)-expressing neurons in the extended amygdala are directly responsive to GH. GHR ablation in SST-expressing cells (SSTΔGHR mice) caused no alterations in energy or glucose metabolism. Notably, SSTΔGHR male mice exhibited increased anxiety-like behavior in the light-dark box and elevated plus maze tests, whereas SSTΔGHR females showed no changes in anxiety. Using auditory Pavlovian fear conditioning, both male and female SSTΔGHR mice exhibited a significant reduction in fear memory. Conversely, GHR ablation in SST neurons did not affect memory in the novel object recognition test. Gene expression was analyzed in a micro punch comprising the central nucleus of the amygdala (CEA) and basolateral (BLA) complex. GHR ablation in SST neurons caused sex-dependent changes in the expression of factors involved in synaptic plasticity and function. In conclusion, GHR expression in SST neurons is necessary to regulate anxiety in males, but not female mice. GHR ablation in SST neurons also decreases fear memory and affects gene expression in the amygdala, although marked sex differences were observed. Our findings identified for the first time a neurochemically-defined neuronal population responsible for mediating the effects of GH on behavioral aspects associated with neuropsychiatric diseases.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Hormone action in the brain regulates different neurological aspects, affecting the predisposition to neuropsychiatric disorders, like depression, anxiety, and posttraumatic stress disorder. Growth hormone (GH) receptor is widely expressed in the brain, but the exact function of neuronal GH action is not fully understood. Here, we showed that mice lacking the GH receptor in a group of neurons that express the neuropeptide somatostatin exhibit increased anxiety. However, this effect is only observed in male mice. In contrast, the absence of the GH receptor in somatostatin-expressing neurons decreases fear memory, a key feature of posttraumatic stress disorder, in males and females. Thus, our study identified a specific group of neurons in which GH acts to affect the predisposition to neuropsychiatric diseases.
