Intranasal administration of sertraline ensures sustained brain delivery and antidepressant effect in a mouse model of depression.
The pursuit of more potent and efficacious antidepressant therapies is of utmost significance. Herein, the intranasal (IN) route was investigated for sertraline brain delivery, encompassing a comparative pharmacokinetic study after a single-dose administration to mice by IN, intravenous (IV) (4.87 mg/kg) and oral (10 mg/kg) routes, and an efficacy/toxicity study to explore the therapeutic effect in mice subjected to the unpredictable chronic mild stress (UCMS) protocol. Neurotransmitters and melatonin were quantified in prefrontal cortex and plasma, respectively. A different drug biodistribution behavior was unveiled for a CNS-acting drug administered by means of the IN route. For the first time, IN administration of sertraline exhibited heightened systemic exposure (bioavailability = 166 %), and a sustained drug release into the brain, in opposition to IV and oral routes, avoiding drug fluctuation. The lower lung exposition (given by normalized area under the curve) observed after IN instillation envisions the reduction of sertraline pulmonary side effects and similarly other peripheral side effects. IN sertraline treatment displayed significant efficacy in ameliorating anhedonia after one week of administration while the 14-day IN treatment regimen translated into decreased immobility time and increased swimming time in the forced swimming test, suggesting an improvement of the depressive-like behavior displayed by the animal depressive-model. Remarkably, these effects were absent with oral sertraline, despite the higher used dose. Noteworthy neurotransmitter alterations were observed, with IN sertraline markedly reducing adrenaline in the prefrontal cortex, while serotonin and melatonin increased following both administration routes. With its sustained brain delivery and serotonin- and melatonin-enhancing potential, the innovative strategy of IN sertraline holds the potential not only to effectively address depressive symptoms but also to mitigate challenges inherent to classic treatments.
